The city was swimming in the emptiness of the summer night, with its streets like labyrinths, with its pedestrians filling them, with its buildings looming over both, with the trees branching eternally upwards – as if it had been swimming, and will be swimming, forever, drawing behind itself the flocks of seagulls, doves and sparrows, the rails of the trains and waves of the sea. From afar, its streets were identical, neat; closer, they were all unique, meandering. From afar, its people were faceless marionettes, their conversations merging into a monotone hum, their movements blending into a singular presence; closer, they were bright, distinct, plural. From afar, its buildings were stiff, monolithic; closer, multifaceted giants.
The other, waiting underneath the linden tree at the intersection of two dark, paved, little streets, with his hand in the pocket of his linen pants, was staring downwards, with an empty gaze, at the palm of his other hand – the one on which his watch was resting. As always in this city, one of the streets on which the other was standing was almost, but not quite, parallel to the sea, and the other one was almost, but not quite, directed towards it. In its other direction, the latter was descending indeterminately downwards, in the general orientation of downtown, where the other was about to go in a little bit. On the wall of the building behind him there were numerous graffiti interlacing, but one, grey and rectangular, was persistently asserting itself:
‘… but here things always go in twos,
for else they dissipate and disappear.‘
The other’s stare – in the void until a while ago – was now focused on his watch’s hands. The watch itself, thin, round, with gilded periphery, with a dial as if carved in marble and a fine chain wound around his palm, was standing still at quarter past ten. The other, disconcerted, studied the seconds hand; it stood still, penetrating nothingness in tense apprehension,…, and suddenly clicked, and kept clicking even faster, as if nothing had taken place; the familiar illusion. At this exact moment, from the yard of the house down the street there appeared the figure of a man, striding evenly, receding. The tiny cloud that had been hiding the full moon was now quickly blown aside, and upon the streets, and the people, and the buildings, a soft light fell, and the leaves of the trees whispered with the voice of the wind, and the other walked down with quiet steps, after the figure and against the rising gust.
Darkness and confusion: turns, and streets, and turns again. Strange forks and unexpected angles. One could think he was walking in circles, outlining some unimaginable polygon, until he approached the next turn, made out the next building and realized it was a different one, one he hadn’t seen before. The figure at the front was suffocating in its desperate walk, going faster and yet seeming to progress more slowly, looking for a way out of the labyrinth,…, but the timelessness suddenly retreated as it walked into one of the major streets of the city – of which there were only two; and the other, once again, followed, sinking into the people and their conversations, unclear, muffled.
-                   … what you want?
-                   Coming back…
-                   … again.
The street lamps cast a mosaic of islands of pale light, lazily falling through the mist. In front of the other, the people emerged from it, and behind him, disappeared again, and he was walking right between them – even though they never stopped to give way – dancing imperceptibly, keeping his pace. The figure was there, ahead, close to the edge of the mist, beyond which there wеrе only the emptiness, the moon and the stars; from time to time, it looked sharply at the faces of bypassers, and they responded with the same; it was frantically throwing glances behind its shoulders, which the other always dodged, hiding behind the crowd or the figure’s own back.
From both sides of the street, the buildings were also emerging from the mist, their details rough in the lazy light: windows like mirrors, showcases of closed stores, thin cracks running up the facades. With each step of the figure, the buildings pushed a little bit towards it; with each step, they rose slowly, reaching for the moon. The figure was chaotically bouncing to the left and right between them, from sign to sign, along the breadth of the street, the other losing it from sight, finding it again right on time, always behind it, crossing the path it attempted to take, pushing it in a different direction.
The figure reached the beginning of the other major street, and for a second their dance faded away,…, and the figure strode towards the tiny park nesting at the intersection. The other was following slowly, walking along that new street, towards the sea; separating the two was the length of the calm surface of a presently quiet water fountain, decorated with a line of soft little lights on its bottom, a line of tiny copies of the moon unable to illuminate anyone’s face to the point of recognition. The figure started for a nearby bench, but in that second one of the countless bypassers occupied it; the figure settled for the one next to it, but with similar result; this happened a few more times, and finally it tried to simply sit, anywhere – even on the ground – but people always managed to intercept its attempts in the most unexpected ways. Whether that was a dance in which the figure was the center and main character, or one which was happening everywhere at once and in which it was the only redundancy, nobody could tell.
Broken by its failure, it sharply tore itself away from the park, entering the sea-bound street. Here the buildings were squeezing the road even tighter, and the suffocating crowd, as if like a river, was accelerating, struggling for breath, anxious to move forward. The figure wanted to run and run and run, but whether it had a choice, nobody could tell; nobody could tell whether it was a tiger bravely paving its way through the jungle, or an island pushed forward by the streams; whether it was the reality in a sea of fictions, or the hole in the crowd which inevitably moved forward together with it. The other was now never losing sight of the figure, constantly increasing the determination of his chase and the sharpness of his step, while the crowd was boiling around them both in meaningless chatter, while the moon stood still right above, and while the buildings watched emotionless; while all of them were passing by the tables and signs and words accidentally caught:
-        You get it?
-        Hahaha!…
-        No other way…
-        … only…
-        …the dreams.
By one decoration – a huge phonograph that didn’t play anymore, and another – an anchor anchored into nothing.
The buildings disappeared.
The fog had no more of them. The crowd pushed the two between the trees like archways, the tiny water droplets, the breeze and the freshness. The freshness in turn brought a certain clarity, which was approaching steadily – of the sea, towards which they were all going.
The trees disappeared.
The streets disappeared.
Down the steps, to the beach, finally. The steps and the noise; the narrowest part; the figure was sprinting downwards, together with the crowd, barely advancing, together with the crowd, and the other was always behind it, the figure drawing him, or he pushing it, or something in between. The excitement was rising, the crowd was condensing, pressing from all sides, turning into a crushing whole, and the two stopped, and the hum of the talk was the only thing, ever more monotonous, impenetrable and suffocating. The other was slowly stretching out his hand, chained to the stones and the people and the noise, forward through the heavy air, reaching for the figure’s shoulder, and the figure knew, but it was chained too, and with the same force was tearing away from the chains, and the hand would need an eternity to catch it,…
The crowd split in two – along the stairway – let them through, melted into the mist.
The people disappeared.
There were now only the freshness and the clarity. The figure stopped for a second, looked around, took a deep breath of the sea air and took the bridge – as the people of this city called the pier, the bridge that was leading nowhere and ended in nothing. The other was a dozen steps behind it, and the two of them were walking this final road, alone under the brightness of the moon, over mosaic after mosaic, each like the previous one, in complete silence, only the waves, as little as waves ever became in this bay, somewhere down there in the darkness, were gently washing the pillars, ‘…, wash, …, wash, …, wash, …’, and were measuring a time – some kind of time – that nobody was counting.
And in that time that nobody was counting, in one moment, the other was reaching for his pocket and clenching fingers around the metal; in a later moment, the other’s grasp of the metal grip was even more decisive, and the two were still walking as one, yard for yard and step for step; in a yet later moment, the other was taking his hand out of his pocket; and in that time that nobody was counting, secrets were whispered: that telling poetically of what’s real was the same as telling literally of a dream; that change was the same as murder; that walking alone by night was the same as not walking alone, for the past followed in your footsteps; and in a yet later moment, the other was aiming, …,
After all of that – somewhen – on the bridge there was only one; there were a few yards left until the end, which he passed with the same regular pace, continuously, and he finally leaned on the railing, staring ponderingly at what was left, at the moon, at the sea, listening carefully: would they whisper him something? Would he see a light, somewhere in front?
Back, at the city, he wouldn’t dare look, because he knew he would find nothing there.
The stars, and the moon, and the sea, disappeared.
